---
layout: post
title: "Why I shifted from Wordpress to Ghost and then finally to Jekyll?"
subtitle: "The evolution of the website."
comments: true
background: '/img/bg-default.jpg'
date: 2018-09-13
tags: random
permalink: '/why-i-shifted-from-wordpress-to-ghost-and-then-finally-to-jekyll/'
---

I started this website long back, first in a different domain, using Wordpress. The current domain is about 6 years old, and was 
recently using Ghost as the backend. This was after much experimentation with several CMSes like Wordpress, Joomla and even Drupal. 
However, I was never happy with any one of the CMSes. With [Ghost](https://ghost.org), I finally had a solid blogging platform with almost zero frills. 
But I was still paying some amount of money to run the server.

And then, I decided to use Jekyll.

It was a very easy choice. First, Jekyll, like Ghost can be updated using markdown. It is a good platform and has lot of customization oppurtunities.
But, the most important factor was that Github pages uses Jekyll, and one could in principle host the website for free on Github. 
That is what I decided to do, and the finished product is this website.

I was happy with Wordpress, I still run [Gonit Sora](https://gonitsora.com) on Wordpress. But, it is too much for a personal blog 
which in any case does not receive much vists, like the present one. So, I decided to shift to Ghost, sometime this year. I learnt a little about Ghost and 
then deployed one on a server hosted in Digital Ocean. All was well, until Ghost released Ghost 2.0. Always eager to try out new 
things I decided to upgrade my Ghost installation. The editor was supposed to be better, but I did not like it, over the old one. 
The added difficulty of no mobile support, made the decision easier for me to shift entirely to Jekyll.

I looked up Jekyll over the last two weeks and experimented with a lot of themes and customizations, until I finally found a 
good theme to use on this website. It was a matter of converting all my Ghost posts into markdown (luckily I also kept a separate 
static version of the website in my computer, and would from time to time push the whole thing using git). Once, this was done, 
the rest of the work in formatting the content took about 2 hours. There is a good online community of Jekyll users and the 
documentation is quite handy. I think, I have now found what I was looking for.
