---
layout: post
title: "Movie Recommender System"
subtitle: 

background: '/img/posts/movie_recommender/1.jpg'
---

Everyone loves movies irrespective of age, gender, race, color, or geographical location. We all in a way are connected to each other via this amazing medium. Yet what most interesting is the fact that how unique our choices and combinations are in terms of movie preferences. Some people like genre-specific movies be it a thriller, romance, or sci-fi, while others focus on lead actors and directors. When we take all that into account, it’s astoundingly difficult to generalize a movie and say that everyone would like it. But with all that said, it is still seen that similar movies are liked by a specific part of the society.

I have created a movie recommendation system related in Kaggle movie dataset.Worked On Item-Based Collaborative Filtering for Movie Recommendation SystemWe are leaving the age of information and entering the age of recommendation. Movie is a role of entertainment for human beings so I decided to build a movie recommender system.To build a recommender system , the most two popular approaches are Content-based and Collaborative Fitlering.

Content-based Filtering :

This filtration strategy is based on the data provided about the items. The algorithm recommends products that are similar to the ones that a user has liked in the past. This similarity (generally cosine similarity) is computed from the data we have about the items as well as the user’s past preferences.
For example, if a user likes movies such as ‘The Prestige’ then we can recommend him the movies of ‘Christian Bale’ or movies with the genre ‘Thriller’ or maybe even movies directed by ‘Christopher Nolan’.So what happens here the recommendation system checks the past preferences of the user and find the film “The Prestige”, then tries to find similar movies to that using the information available in the database such as the lead actors, the director, genre of the film, production house, etc and based on this information find movies similar to “The Prestige”.


Collaborative Fitlering:
This filtration strategy is based on the combination of the user’s behavior and comparing and contrasting that with other users’ behavior in the database. The history of all users plays an important role in this algorithm. The main difference between content-based filtering and collaborative filtering that in the latter, the interaction of all users with the items influences the recommendation algorithm while for content-based filtering only the concerned user’s data is taken into account.
There are multiple ways to implement collaborative filtering but the main concept to be grasped is that in collaborative filtering multiple user’s data influences the outcome of the recommendation. and doesn’t depend on only one user’s data for modeling.

There are 2 types of collaborative filtering algorithms:

User-based Collaborative filtering
The basic idea here is to find users that have similar past preference patterns as the user ‘A’ has had and then recommending him or her items liked by those similar users which ‘A’ has not encountered yet. This is achieved by making a matrix of items each user has (rated,viewed,liked,clicked) depending upon the task at hand, and then computing the similarity score between the users and finally recommending items that the concerned user isn’t aware of but users similar to him/her are and liked it.

For example, if the user ‘A’ likes ‘Batman Begins’, ‘Justice League’ and ‘The Avengers’ while the user ‘B’ likes ‘Batman Begins’, ‘Justice League’ and ‘Thor’ then they have similar interests because we know that these movies belong to the super-hero genre. So, there is a high probability that the user ‘A’ would like ‘Thor’ and the user ‘B’ would like The Avengers’.

Disadvantages

People are fickle-minded i.e their taste change from time to time and as this algorithm is based on user similarity it may pick up initial similarity patterns between 2 users who after a while may have completely different preferences.
There are many more users than items therefore it becomes very difficult to maintain such large matrices and therefore needs to be recomputed very regularly.
This algorithm is very susceptible to shilling attacks where fake users profiles consisting of biased preference patterns are used to manipulate key decisions.
 

Item-based Collaborative Filtering
The concept in this case is to find similar movies instead of similar users and then recommending similar movies to that ‘A’ has had in his/her past preferences. This is executed by finding every pair of items that were (rated,viewed,liked,clicked) by the same user, then measuring the similarity of those (rated,viewed,liked,clicked) across all user who (rated,viewed,liked,clicked) both, and finally recommending them based on similarity scores.

Here, for example, we take 2 movies ‘A’ and ‘B’ and check their ratings by all users who have rated both the movies and based on the similarity of these ratings, and based on this rating similarity by users who have rated both we find similar movies. So if most common users have rated ‘A’ and ‘B’ both similarly and it is highly probable that ‘A’ and ‘B’ are similar, therefore if someone has watched and liked ‘A’ they should be recommended ‘B’ and vice versa.

Advantages over User-based Collaborative Filtering
Unlike people’s taste, movies don’t change.
There are usually a lot fewer items than people, therefore easier to maintain and compute the matrices.
Shilling attacks are much harder because items cannot be faked.
This movie recommender system is focused on Collaborative filtering approach which is based on the items.
For Item-based CF , two items are similar when they received similar ratings from a same user, then will make a prediction for a target user on an item by calculating weighted average of ratings on most X similar items from this user.

I have applied a cosine similarity to recommend the similar movies based on the dataset. Cosine similarity is a metric used to measure how similar the documents are irrespective of their size. 

Mathematically, it measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors projected in a multi-dimensional space. The cosine similarity is advantageous because even if the two similar documents are far apart by the Euclidean distance (due to the size of the document), chances are they may still be oriented closer together. The smaller the angle, higher the cosine similarity.Mathematically, it measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors projected in a multi-dimensional space. In this context, the two vectors I am talking about are arrays containing the word counts of two documents.The cosine similarity helps overcome this fundamental flaw in the ‘count-the-common-words’ or Euclidean distance approach.

Here is my recommendation system application site.

Check out my [website](https://movie-recommend-app.herokuapp.com) for more fun. You can also check my  [github] account that I applied a cosine similarity algorithm in python.

[github]: https://github.com/thanthanswe-github/movie_recommender_system
