---
layout: post
title: '2021: A Year in Books'
date: '2022-01-12 13:37:20'
tags: books
background: '/img/books.jpeg'
subtitle: "A Year of Reading."
comments: true
permalink: '/2021-a-year-in-books/'
---

Last year (2021) was a book-reading highlight for me. I completed 120 books, with an average page count of 259. That is about three times of what I usually read in a good year. I have been thinking of possible reasons for this phenomenon and I think I have narrowed it down to three reasons primarily.

First, I was very unwell for the most part of the first seven months of the year. I was almost completely bed-ridden for three months or so and to get my concentration going so that I could do my job, I started to read more than I usually did. This was also because I could not go out, and this gave me lots of free time (about 90 minutes a day), which I spent reading. One book followed the other.

Second, I found three subjects which I had not read before and which was very interesting for me, so much so that I was really hooked. These were paleoanthropology, books about books and Indian politics. I read about 10+ books on each of these subjects and I now have a long TBR list on them which I am planning to pursue this year as well.

Third, starting treatment for some mental health issues (which I did not know I had) was like a light-bulb moment for me. Problems which I did not know I had disappeared almost instantly and I felt great, my mind was more active and sharp and this helped in the reading.

There were various other reasons as well, but I won't elaborate on them.

So, which books I enjoyed the most? I am not sure if I can answer this objectively because for me each book was different in some way or the other. But, what I can do is to list the books which I rated 5-star on Goodreads. This is a very subjective list, so I am not sure if it helps anyone apart from me. So, here it goes.

**Science and Scientists**: *The Scientist as Rebel by Freeman Dyson* and *Serving the Reich: The Struggle for the Soul of Physics under Hitler by Philip Ball*.

**Paleoanthropology**: *Neanderthal Man: In Search of Lost Genomes by Svante Paabo* and *First Steps: How Upright Walking Made Us Human by Jeremy DeSilva*.

**The Holocaust**: *Night by Elie Wiesel*, *Mengele: Unmasking the “Angel of Death” by David Marwell* and *The Lost Café Schindler: One Family, Two Wars, and the Search for Truth by Meriel Schindler*.

**Essays**: *Books v. Cigarettes by George Orwell*, *Gratitude by Oliver Sacks*, *Notes on Nationalism by George Orwell* and *Fascism and Democracy by George Orwell*.

**Photography Books**: *Florence Photographs* and *Famous Cities of the World: Vienna*.

**Fiction**: *Undertow by Jahnavi Barua* and *Bookscout by John Dunning*.

**COVID-19**: *How Contagion Works: Science, Awareness, and Community in Times of Global Crises — The Essay That Helped Change the Covid-19 Debate by Paolo Giordano*.
