---
layout: page
title: MA301
description: Optimization Techniques
mathjax: true
background: '/img/teaching.jpg'
permalink: /teaching/IIIT/ma301
---

# Information

**Instructor**: Dr Manjil Pratim Saikia

**Contact**: manjil@iiitmanipur.ac.in (please only use this email address to send me emails related to this course)

**Lecture Time & Place**: T 1000-1055 (Room 5), W 0900-0955 (Room 4) and F 1400-1455 (Room 8)

**Office Hours**: T 1700-1800 and Th 1700-1800 in Faculty Block - II, Office F-7 (*also by appointment*)

**Course Prerequisites**: It will be assumed that students are familiar with the following courses: [MA101](/teaching/IIIT/ma1011), MA203, CS101, CS201 and CS301.

**Attendance Policy**: Attendance is mandatory, institute policy is minimum 75% continous attendance failing which the student is not allowed to sit in exams. If you have a genuine reason for missing the lectures please talk to me or the HoD as soon as possible (*talking just a few weeks before the exam will not be sufficient*).

# Course Details

Linear programming problem: formulation and geometric ideas, simplex algorithm, duality, transportation and assignment problem, Integer programming problems; Nonlinear optimization: method of Lagrange multipliers, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker theory, numerical methods for nonlinear optimization; Convex optimization and quadratic programming; Applications of linear, integer and quadratic programming to various areas of science and engineering.

# Reading Materials

The recommended textbook for *major portions* of the course is **Numerical Optimization with Applications** by *Suresh Chandra, Jayadeva and Aparna Mehra* (Narosa Publishing House, 2016). This book is available in the institute library. I will supplement this book with other materials of my own for some portions of the course.

Each week **two** students will be in charge of transscribing the lectures for that week. This should be done in LaTeX using the template available [here](/teaching/IIIT/MA305/template.tex), you should use this [style file](/teaching/IIIT/MA305/template.sty) and [bib file](/teaching/IIIT/MA305/template.bib) when required. All figures must be preferably in pdf format (check [Ipe](https://ipe.otfried.org/) for instance), otherwise in both [EPS](/teaching/IIIT/MA305/week0_example.eps) and [jpg](/teaching/IIIT/MA305/week0_example.jpg) format. The output should look something [like this](/teaching/IIIT/MA305/template.pdf). The transcribing will earn you marks for a part of Assessment III.

# Exams

**[Assessment I](/teaching/IIIT/MA301/ass1.pdf)**
